# The Gazelle's Programming Style Guide

Welcome to our style guide! This is where we outline the principles we try and stick to while writing code to make our own and future developer's lives easier.

To first give you a bit of context, what drives many of the decisions made in this guide is the environment this software engineering project lives in. It is a project that will change hands many times, often between hands that do not have a lot of experience, and we will continuously be onboarding new developers that can have as little experience as only having completed Intro to Computer Science. This is a big challenge, and that is why in this guide we try to outline some best practices that we think will make it easier for less experienced developers to write high quality code as soon as possible. This also means that we are setting some pretty strict guidelines some times to make it easier to code with consistency and to take away some choices or worries from the developer. It is kind of treated like an open source project. We have also tried to be aware of not adding too many dependencies to our project that new developers need to learn, as we know that just getting into web development is something of a steep learning curve already. Every dependency we've added we've estimated (or at least hoped) that the ease it gives in terms of developer experience outweighs the extra learning curve it adds.

## The simple things that are actually so important

There are many things that developers new to Software Engineering can be surprised at that we take pretty seriously, and we can seem a bit pedantic, but software engineering is in big part about making code readable and maintainable so that someone else (or yourself after being away from your code for a few weeks or months) could come in and modify or extend what you were working on.

### Variable Names

Writing good variable names is important, it is also very hard actually, but when done right it can make code delightfully easy to read. Here are some short articles that talk about variable naming we would recommend you to read at least some of. Don't necessarily take everything they say as facts, it is completely okay to agree with some of their preferences, but try to take away the idea of using variable names to document your code well, and to avoid making bad mistakes like naming your variables `var1`, or `i`, `j`, `k`, `a`, `b`, `c`. The resources are as follows: [A good guide to variable naming](https://a-nickels-worth.blogspot.com/2016/04/a-guide-to-naming-variables.html), [an interesting WIKI with discussions on variable naming](http://wiki.c2.com/?GoodVariableNames), and [an interesting small case study on variable naming](https://m.signalvnoise.com/hunting-for-great-names-in-programming-16f624c8fc03). The part current members of The Gazelle's dev management (at the time of writing) probably disagree the most with from the first article is when it's okay to use 1-2 letter variable names (we want less of them), but as mentioned above this is not an easy issue to come to a clean solution to, and people have many differing opinions!

### Comments

Similarly being good at writing comments is very important to the readability of your code, and it's not just writing lots of comments, it can actually be very detrimental writing too many comments if they aren't high quality and/or necessary. Here is a good post about good practices of commenting code that we recommend reading: https://blog.codinghorror.com/code-tells-you-how-comments-tell-you-why/

### Documentation

Hopefully it is clear that good documentation is important as you're in the process of reading our documentation right now and hopefully appreciate the good parts and can maybe feel the problem in the areas where we may still lack in the quality of our documentation. Especially since our team has a lot of new developers we focus a lot on very strong documentation by writing guides like this and giving good resources for learning how to use the technologies we use. If you change anything in how our dev environment works it should be documented in the setup guide, if you change how the server setup works it should be documented in the server setup guide, and if you've had to ask for help for anything during your onboarding process to this project, please do consider whether you could add something to this documentation that would've helped you solve your problem had it been here, to make the onboarding process smoother for future Gazelle developers.

### Indentation, semicolons, trailing commas and more

The thing that can maybe seem the most pedantic to new software engineers in pull request reviews is when things like white space, whether there's a trailing comma, or where you put your opening and closes brackets and parenthesis are commented on. The reasoning behind this is that having a consistent style in these matters across the whole codebase makes it a lot easier to read for developers. Luckily you won't have to have many of these comments as we have checking of these things automated by linters! If you skipped that section before here's a bit of an explanation of how we use linters: [linting explanation](./dev-environment/setting-up-dev-environment.md#note-on-linters-and-tests)
